# Multiple-Sclerosis-Detection-ANN
Computerized Detection of Multiple Sclerosis with Artificial Intelligence and DTI Scans

## Abstract 
Multiple sclerosis is the product of damage to the myelin sheath of nerve cells, an insulating protein-lipid structure which wraps around the axons. This results in a complicated neurodegenerative disorder. The cause of the demyelinating disease is not completely understood by the medical community. Currently, the McDonald Criteria is used to diagnose patients based on empirical observations from Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) technology, lumbar punctures, or evoked potential. The ineffectiveness of the diagnostic method, results in the reduced quality of life in the patient. Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) is a new technology that may be the key in detecting damage to myelin sheaths in an effective manner. The experiment will compare the diffuse tensor images of healthy adult humans, those with demyelinating diseases, and those with multiple sclerosis. Diffuse Tensor Imaging works based on the diffusion of water molecules that move based on myelin sheath on axons. It should be expected a healthy human adult’s diffuse tensor image orientation is complete, and an adult human with multiple sclerosis be incomplete. The proposal is designed to offer a better method of diagnosis based on diffusion tensor imaging. 
## Background Information
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative disorder from damage to the myelin sheath of nerve cells. Although not severely affecting life expectancy, it heavily limits patients’ daily lives. The disease is characterized by attacks that induce extreme fatigue, lack of coordination, weakness, tingling, impaired sensation, blurred vision, cognitive impairment, and mood changes. The symptoms of attacks may last for weeks, until recovery. Furthermore, MS is very hard to diagnose. The medical community currently uses the ‘McDonald Criteria’ and performs a variety of tests, evaluating mental, emotional, and neurological functions. These tests are performed through MRI scans, lumbar puncture, or evoked potential. The McDonald diagnostic criteria specifically includes lesions detected over a period of time, or other disseminations in space. However, the criteria has its limitations. It is not specific over the nature of the lesions, and only recommended to be applied after ruling out other possible diseases. The cause of MS is not clear, and afflicted individuals are forced to undergo therapy. While the cause is not clear, it is known that the disease is demyelinating, the myelin sheath of neurons is damaged, and the nervous system’s ability to communicate is fractured. Thus, rather than attempting to diagnose MS empirically, it would be more time-efficient to check directly for demyelination using an advanced imaging technique. 
Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) is a new technique that uses diffusional characteristics of water to assess white matter integrity in the brain. It is able to detect the myelin sheath on nerve cells, and thus detect demyelination. The generated image is of the architecture of axons composed of the myelin shields. In brain white matter, the motion of water molecules can be restricted by the presence of highly organized stable myelin fiber tracts. Currently, the medical community has reviewed and revised the McDonald criteria several times, and is commonly used. Most of the research currently in improving the diagnosis of MS is attempting to improve the effectiveness of the McDonald criteria, through new MRI techniques, or finding imaging biomarkers. However, the purpose of this experiment is to demonstrate the potential benefits from using DTI scans.
## Research Idea/Hypothesis
This proposal is designed to construct a new diagnostic criteria based on diffusion tensor imaging, which directly detects damage to the myelin sheath. If DTI images are generated through the diffusion of water molecules surrounding axons and myelin sheath, then demyelinating diseases can be detected if the normal architecture of the brain is incomplete, combined with criteria specifically designed for DTI, will result in a diagnosis. DTI may be used as a new technique to detect myelin sheath damage and lead to the diagnosis of MS. The criteria will be created from specific characteristics found from imaging. 
## Rationale
Since multiple sclerosis is demyelinating, this technique is intended to utilize DTI to determine myelin sheath damage. Criteria for assessing nerve damage and the diagnosis of MS is a considerable factor in treating the disorder. Researchers from Sapienza University, found that MS had specific diffusing patterns in the imaging, and that each phenotype had its own unique pattern. They were also able to determine its stage of progression. 
## Significance of Research Idea
Currently, the method for diagnosing MS is ineffective and slow. Diagnosis is often delayed, and by the time it is diagnosed, there may already be extensive damage to the central nervous system. The McDonald technique uses empirical observations rather than being certain of myelin sheath damage. Through detecting direct damage to the myelin sheath, doctors will be able to instantly recognize MS in its early stages, even during silent cases. Therapies can be started earlier, which can prevent and mitigate damage to the nervous system, reduce the risk of attack, and overall improve the quality of life of the patient. Even if the disease was detected late, DTI would give the doctor and patient better understanding of its progression. 
## Research Approach/Methodology
This study uses the data and DTI of 210,000 people from ages 20 - 50. 

The new criteria for evaluating the presence of MS can be determined through the study of patients already diagnosed with the disorder, in various stages of manifestation. The sample size will be approximately 150. A control group of regular, healthy adult humans will be used. Another control group of adult humans with other demyelinating diseases will also be studied. Other variables include the ages of the subjects, as well as pre existing conditions affecting myelin integrity. These could affect the results of the study, since it would make it difficult to determine if the nerve damage is from age, a pre existing condition, or multiple sclerosis. Subjects will be imaged using DTI, and the results of the healthy subjects will be compared to those possibly having MS, and those with other diseases. The images will be analysed for myelin damage, and the severity assessed. The general trend of the data should indicate that subjects with MS suffer from more demyelination than healthy subjects, thus, it should be much more efficient to assess myelin damage with DTI than with traditional techniques. The results will also be compared to the control group with other demyelinating diseases, to determine differences in criteria. There will be a particular emphasis on subjects with early-stage MS, as it will be crucial in determining early-warning signs of MS. From the scans of healthy patients and those with MS, not only can a patient be suspected of having the disorder, but also the stage of the disorder they are in, providing the possibility for early-stage treatment. 

Using an Artificial Neural Network To Detect MS From DTI
In order to test the efficacy of DTI as a means of screening patients for MS, a neural network was created to determine the presence of MS. Fractional Anisotropy and Mean Diffusivity. In Spite of there being an option to create a convolutional neural network (CNN) with the various DTI scans, this study opted for a Feed Forward Neural network. This decision was made primarily due to the low accuracy DTI CNN’s possessed in past research studies. A CNN was attempted within this study, however due to confidential reasons, the brain scans of the patients within this study are not permitted to be presented. This study extracted Mean Diffusivity(MD) and Fractional Anisotropy(FA) from the DTI scans to help determine the MS status of a patient. These numerical values were obtained in areas of the brain which have high axonal integrity to maximize the accuracy of the results when building ANN. When looking at these values, the model produces a prediction using forward propagation. Generally, a high FA and low MD indicate the patient has a high probability of having MS whereas a low MD and a high FA good would be that of a normal healthy adult. Using the supervised learning method the model is given a randomized set of this data, and gives a percent certainty that the given person has MS. Based off whether or not the patient has developed MS (denoted by a 0 and 1 respectively), the model 
## Conclusion
Accessible and accurate diagnosis is the first step in providing treatment to a disease. Although the cause of multiple sclerosis is still unknown, its demyelinating effect can be used to determine if a patient has the disorder. Up until recently, this has been difficult to achieve, and criteria have not yet been determined for the process. DTI could be a huge leap forward in being able to detect myelin damage in nerve cells. It can be used as a faster and more effective method in detecting demyelination, and the degree of demyelination can be used to assess the severity of the diagnosis. 
